### Introduction

Hello happy Friday\! It is Friday, December 12th. We are just flying through December; it is such a busy time of year for I think everybody, but I think even more so if you are a mom with kids, um, with all the winter winter fun and all the holiday parties and all of the things to think about coming up at the end of the month. And just so much happening and so it feels like we are really flying through this crazy season. And this month, um, when I'm looking at the calendar right now, we only have one more full week of school next week and then just a day and a half and off we go into holiday break and then it'll be 2026 which is crazy honestly.  
Um, so this week in today's video I wanted to kind of share with you some of my favorite activities we have for addition within 20 and subtraction within 20\. I did a little video... just a month ago or so, uh, maybe two months ago I think it was October, where we were doing addition and subtraction strategies within 10 and really kind of getting those just basics down—a review from kindergarten and really kind of solidifying those facts. But now here we are with numbers to 20, uh, which is a much bigger deal, right? Because they can't just use their fingers anymore.  
Number one. Number two, some of those strategies are going to really include decomposing and looking for friendly numbers—friendly numbers of five, friendly numbers of 10, looking for doubles and doubles plus one facts. So all of that is kind of a step up from what they're used to. Um, and even just recognizing those teen numbers as tens and ones is really going to help them when they decompose and really add these numbers especially as we get higher later in the year to numbers within 40 and then numbers within 100 and 120\.  
So I thought I would take a little bit of time, share some of my favorite activities that we do. Uh, we actually just finished a little craft that I'm going to show you... uh, it's not my craft, it's a craft from—I cannot remember the name. Um, I will when I share about the craft, I'll get the name of the person who sells it but I have a bunch of them. Um, and they're highly differentiated so it's a lot of fun, but we created a fun little winter craft so I want to share that too. So let me take a look around, let me gather up some of my favorite games that we've been playing.  
Before I do share that I want to show you the uh anchor charts that we've used in the past. This is my addition anchor chart where I share some of the strategies that we have taught so you can take a look at that and see just some of the strategies that I am teaching my students how to use as a friendly little reminder. And then I also have this one right here, same thing but with subtraction. So just as reminders for my students of what strategies they can use. Um, I don't make my students use any sort of strategy—whatever one kind of sticks for them—but I do like to introduce them to as many as I can just so they are aware of them and have more options to use them.

### Counting Strategies

So that being said, now let me gather up my stuff and I'll share. All right so when we are thinking about different addition and subtraction activities and everything, um, of course we're first starting with **counting on**. That's usually our first strategy that we use. Let me just turn off this board it's going to drive me crazy. Um, so I definitely do a lot of counting games. If you followed my channel for a while you'll know **Buzz** is one of my favorite counting games, um, where students just go around in a circle and they count as high as they can but they can never say the uh number 10, instead they say "buzz" and the next person sits down. So just practicing that oral counting is really important.  
And it's also important to practice not only counting forward but also counting backwards. Um, we don't play Buzz counting backwards but we just practice counting. Um, I think I've shared this before too but there's another game that I love with counting where it's not even a game, I'll just have students spread out with a partner around the room and they have to whisper count back and forth as high as they can. Um, and I'll just put like a timer up for a minute and see how high everybody can go starting at zero. And then I will play it again but we'll play another time and we will either count backwards—let's see who can count... see if you can count back from 50 all the way down to zero before the timer's out—or see if you can count on as high as you can from 23 or from 17 or from any number.  
Just getting them practicing because that first strategy we're going to teach is **counting on** where I have students put the number in their head and then they count on that many more. Now I like to have them do it like that with physical, you know, fingers there, numbers in their head. Another strategy I like to use if they can't hold that number in their head and then do their fingers, um, they can draw dots on a page. So I can have them put the number in their head and then they draw that many dots, whatever number you're adding on, and then count those. Also there's a number line. A number line is a little more abstract, it can be tricky for students because they're counting the spaces in between, um, but we do teach them how to use a number line of course as a strategy as well.

### Make 10 Strategy

So lots of different options. After we get into the adding the counting on strategy, this is where we start to think of other strategies like **making 10**, identifying a doubles, and then if I know a doubles I can know a doubles plus one. Um, and kind of decomposing those numbers to make tens and make doubles facts is really fun. Uh, and starts to happen at this stage in the game when they're doing the math warm-ups which I love. So once we've taught those strategies I want to show you this board here that we use. It's our **make 10 board**.  
Um, and so when we're actually physically doing the make 10 strategy, all I'm doing is I am giving students problems... um so I'll flip this around and show you but I'm giving them a problem where they can make a 10 and then they're building the problem with the cubes and then making 10 to solve. So let me just show you real quick. So for something like this I would shout out a problem or I'd probably type it on the board um and have students go ahead and solve.  
So I would have students work with a partner. Um, one color would be orange, one would be blue... or one partner would be orange one would be blue, that'd have two different colors. And I'd say: "Okay partner A you're going to make the first addend eight, partner B you're gonna make 10... or sorry five."  
So we have:8 \+ 5  
We're going to figure out what that is but we're going to do it by making 10\. And then I'd have students take turns depending on who built what. So partner A, partner B... partner A we can go first. Let's make 10\. How can I do that quickly? They're going to take this two put it up here and we're going to see that 8 \+ 5 is the same as 10 \+ 3.8 \+ 5 \\rightarrow 10 \+ 3 \= 13  
And we talk about how it's a little bit easier to add this because we already know from our teen numbers unit that 10 \+ 3 more is 13\. I don't need to count it all up.  
And when I see it like this sometimes it can be a little harder. Then we will you know erase the board, clear the board and I might say: "Okay let's do nine, let's do 9 \+ 2."9 \+ 2  
Now the next partner is going to go ahead and make that 10\. What can I do? Move one right up. 9 \+ 2 is the same as 10 \+ 1.9 \+ 2 \= 11Just like:10 \+ 1 \= 11  
We talk a lot about how this is actually decomposing this number two into the number 1 and 1 so we can take it and move it. Now not the best example because with 9 \+ 2 I'd probably just have them count on, but with really with any higher number I'm just like "Oh 9 and four." Let me just quickly boop make that 10\. 10 and three, same answer.  
Just a quick little make 10 mat like that. I have shared these before in the past. Um, I love these. I'll link them down below. Uh, I forget where they are from but I have a ton of them and they are just dry erase and they have a number bond as well as a 10 frame and two 10 frames for 20\.

### Fluency and IXL

I do just want to share before we get too far into all of my favorite activities that after we teach a ton of hands-on practice first—hands-on, hands-on, hands-on—uh, and then we go to like the pictorial representation and everything, we definitely move into fluency. Addition and subtraction fluency within 20 is so important, and before that within 10, uh, for my students being able to solve problems as they continue to get better and better at math. And one of my favorite ways to practice fluency is through... if you followed my channel for a while you know I love **IXL**. It is an online learning program for kids in grades K through 12 which has tons of skill-based review problems games and activities that you can assign directly to your students.  
Let me show you a couple of my students favorite games and activities over there. So one of my favorite parts of IXL is their new **Fluency Zone**. When you go to learning in fluency zone you can find tons of fun activities for students to build their fluency. They have it for grades 1 through 4\. So if you click on grade 1, which is where I go, they have addition, subtraction, and then also mixed. So we started with addition and subtraction within 10 and now my students are able to do uh higher fluency so we can do **mixed addition and subtraction**. And press start 10\.  
And once students are in here they can go ahead and press start now and they can start solving problems as fast as they can. When they get in there they're just typing the problems and again they are kind of working against themselves to see how many they can solve within 1 minute. Up here they have a little visual countdown timer to see how much time is left and they can solve these problems however they would like, they are just racing themselves. So at the end they'll see how many they got correct and try to beat it next time. When the time is up students finish the race and they can see that they got 13 correct and I can see right now that this was my personal best. Um, it even lets me see I accidentally typed in 75 here instead of 15 so it lets you see which ones you got wrong too.  
There are also two different tracks. There's this one right here that we just did and there's also bubble boost which is kind of underwater and a lot of fun. As you can see it's such a fun way for students to practice their fluency that they can easily do at school or at home. If you want to try out IXL with your own students or your own kids at home they're actually offering a 30-day free trial for teachers or an exclusive 25% off for parents at home. All you need to do is click the link in my description or scan the QR code on my screen.

### Math Print & Play Games

So for every kind of strategy and skill that we're teaching, right, we're always using those hands-on manipulatives first showing students how to do it and then I'm having them practice with games. What I like about this unit is now that we've already kind of gone into—since we've already done addition and subtraction within 10—they kind of pick this up a little bit faster. So some of my favorite games are going to actually be from this print and play pack right here. It's my uh math print and play games. I have them for all different subjects but addition and subtraction, these are all within 20\. So let me share with you some of my faves.  
**Game 1: Spinning Around**All right one of the first ones we have is just called **Spinning Around** and this is one of the first ones we play um after we do our counting on strategy. All you're going to need is a spinner, you need a dice, and you need some cubes. So students will go ahead and roll the dice.(Rolls a 6)They'll move that many spaces: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6\. We've got "10 plus..." and they go ahead and spin whatever they land on. Or you can have them spin first.5 \+ 10Whatever, it doesn't matter, still going to get the same answer **15**.If they get it correct they go ahead and color it in. So their partner does have to check them. Um and if they get the answer correct then they color it in and then the next person goes.1 \+ 3 \= 4Color it in. Um easy enough, all they're doing is just practicing counting on. For this again they can put the number in their head and count on, they can use a number line, they can use whatever strategy is going to work.  
**Game 2: Number Crash**Another game my kids love is called **Number Crash** and I have this for addition and subtraction and I also have it differentiated so this one's going to use three dice, uh the other ones are going to use two dice. Um so for this game all you do is since it's three dice version they roll all three dice, boom, they have to find the sum.4 \+ 4 \= 88 \+ 1 \= 9And then whoever's turn it is is going to actually move to the very first nine that they see. So that one would be this one. Then the next partner goes.6 \+ 2 \+ 1 \= 9Uh oh, we have a crash already\! So what students will do is if they have a crash and they get the same answer that somebody else is on, they knock them back to start and they get to take over their spot. So they just continue rolling back and forth finding the different sum. Let's see. This one would move all the way up here to 13\. Uh and then just roll, roll. They keep moving up, keep moving down. If they get a crash they have to go back. So on and so forth but in order to win the game they have to actually land on a 10\. So they could be stuck here for a long time um but they need to get a sum of 10 to actually win.  
**Game 3: Subtraction Board**So this is a fun one that they have and then it's similar for subtraction except they have a spinner and then they roll uh roll a dice to see how much they're going to subtract from the number that they spun. Uh and same thing they play the same way and they have a different number that they have to land on. I actually happen to just have this one next to me but the B board is going to be within 20 and the A board is within uh 11 looks like, um but lower numbers. So make sure that when you're playing it that the B board matches the B board here that way you get the right answers. So again for this one students will actually spin it...17And then minus one is going to be 16.17 \- 1 \= 16So over here they would move their cube to the first 16 which is all the way here. Uh and then again they just spin, roll, move and anytime they crash this poor person has to go all the way back to start.  
**Game 4: Color Them**A super simple game is just called **Color Them**. For this one again I have different ones—two dice and I have three dice for differentiation. Students will just roll all three dice and find the sum and this... they just take turns coloring in these circles back and forth. So this one was in their win station this week because it is very simple and easy to follow, all students can play. Uh and again they're just finding the sum, coloring in the circles. If that sum is already colored in and there's no more then their turn is skipped. Just to add a little gamification to it and when the time is up whoever has colored in the most circles is the winner.  
**Doubles & Doubles Plus One Activities**Now when it comes to teaching doubles and doubles plus one there are two resources that I love. The first um this is like a **math and move** type of resource. It looks like this, I think it's from Polka Dots... Polka Dot something I can't remember her name is Emily I know. Um but I will link it down below and this is just a really fun activity where students have to solve the doubles problem and then whatever the answer is they have to move a little bit. So if it's like:5 \+ 5I have them get out their whiteboards they write it down uh they flip it to me and then if they have the right answer which is **10**, they do 10 jumping jacks or 10 toe touches, it tells it on the screen.  
**Game 5: Disco Doubles**And then there is this unit right here... I'll put it over here. Um I purchased it I think last year or two years ago on TPT uh and it just has some doubles and doubles plus one board games um and little activities that students really love. This one here **Disco Doubles** is what I'm going to show you uh and this one is just a bump game. So easy peasy uh all students do is move around. Let me just flip it so I can show you. In case you have never played bump the way it works is you can just start anywhere on the board you move that many spaces: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5\. Solve the problem.6 \+ 6 \= 12So with my color I find a 12 and I cover it. Then this player would go... let's pretend they land on two. Find a two and cover it. Now where it gets fun and interesting is if I get another sum of 12\. So if I land on 6 \+ 6 again and it's my color, I can actually lock it with two cubes here and this means I cannot get bumped. So this stays here forever. If I was blue and I landed on a two because another player is on a two I could bump it away and that player is off the board.  
**Game 6: Fill the Spaces**Another subtraction game I love is called **Fill the Spaces**. I have this game for free um within the 10 version but this is the same but within 20\. Again these are all from my print and play addition and subtraction packs um just fun quick little games, most are differentiated so you can play within 10 and then again play within 20 which I like. So for this game all students need to do is they are filling in the spaces here and they're always subtracting from 20\. So all they're going to do is roll two dice and whatever the sum is they are taking that away from 20\. So if they get uh let's see that they get six.20 \- 6 \= 14And they'll fill in one of the 14s in the grid here uh like one of these empty spaces right there. I don't know why I didn't flip this but they just fill that in with their colored pencil or their marker and then the next player goes and you go back and forth and back and forth until you fill in all the spaces and then at the end you count up your color and whoever filled the most spaces is the winner.

### Crafts and Task Cards

I also have a couple task cards that I want to show you but they're actually at my house right now so I'm going to head home and um when I get home I will share those task cards that we love. But basically with addition and subtraction within 20 as always with math we're going to start with that hands-on, those manipulatives, and then we are going to get into some fun fluency games to practice, practice, practice. And then I like to add task cards and games during WIN time just to keep that review going throughout the year along with things like.  
**At Home: Math Craft**Hello from home\! I did say I was going to pop in later. I'm already in my comfy cozies, patriots are having a great year this year uh anyway and I'm getting ready because I'm hosting book club in just a little bit. But I wanted to share with you, I said some of the task cards are home um but also I forgot to share while I was at school this little craft right here. Here's a couple of my students with theirs already done. Um that craft is by **Jana Gutierrez** I think is how you say her name um and she does a bunch of little math crafts like that which I love. Um and they are completely differentiated so you can actually do the same craft um with the penguin or the cityscape or the snowman—those are the three I had my kids choose from—uh and they can make the whole thing and then the snowballs are just what's differentiated. So they have addition and subtraction within 10, they also have—we did subtraction within 20 cuz that's what we're kind of just finishing up—so uh that was my snowballs but it goes all the way up to multiplication there might even be division I'm not sure. But I love those crafts. I will link that one down below.  
**Task Cards**Okay fast forwarding, let me show you some of the task cards that I love. I always do my task cards for review stations or during WIN time or sometimes during math centers. Um and I have the whole bundle right here uh there's a ton of them and all for different skills. So I think in the last video where I shared addition and subtraction within 10 tips I think uh I'm pretty sure I shared the task cards there but they're different ones cuz when we get up to 20 I have some slightly different strategies and skills that they are working on. So let me flip this around and I'll show you.  
Okay so we have subtraction and we have addition. Some of them are pretty basic so I'm just going to show you the front.

* **Add and Clip**: The sum is in the middle and students just have to go around and do a paper clip or not a paper clip... what's it called? A clothespin. A clothespin or circle it with a dry erase marker all the ones that equal that number in the middle. Same with add and clip very similar thing but they're just adding the numbers here and then they have to go ahead and find the sum and clip it.  
* **Ducks in a Pond**: Here we have like a little visual so they have to actually count up and find the two addends, write them down um and then solve.  
* **True or False**: I love. And here I have some 10 frames so here they're drawing the equation so:10 \+ 4 \= 14They need to draw it and see if it's true or false. Circle thumbs up or thumbs down.7 \+ 4 \= 12(False)6 \+ 6 \= 11(False)  
* **Build and Add**: This one we're using manipulatives. Um I talk about this with all of my task cards, I like to make each one have a slightly different skill, right? So here we're using a 10 frame, they're identifying true or false. Here we're using visuals they're writing the sentence. Here they're simply solving the problem. Here they're looking for multiple ways to make a sum. For this one they're using manipulatives so if it says:5 \+ 13They have to build a stack of unifix cubes put five here, 13 here and write the sum here.  
* **Making 10**: Just what I showed you earlier but now they're taking it a step further uh and they are doing this on by drawing it. So 9 \+ 6 or let's do this one:8 \+ 7So they draw eight and they would draw seven. Then they would go ahead and erase two to put it over to make a 10\. Show that it's 2 and five (the 7 becomes 2 and 5).10 \+ 5 \= 15And then write the answer in the box.

And then for subtraction a lot of the same ones:

* **Subtract and Clip**: Which is the same as add and clip.  
* **Count and Cross Out**: So here they have uh the number on the card so this is like their pictorial representation. I can open one up let me see... 10\. So we have 10 buttons they need to actually physically cross out four of them and then write the sum. So here we're using the strategy of actually crossing out.  
* **Bunny Hops**: Of course is going to be a number line one so they have to use the number line to solve.  
* **Eating Cookies**: This one um they can either use some type of small manipulative or they can just go ahead and draw them. So in the 'count and cross out' it's already there for them. Here I want them to actually draw 16 circles and then erase or cross out five to get the answer.  
* **Missing Parts**: And then for this tricky one we've got missing parts. So uh I like to talk about—we always talk about every time we're doing addition and subtraction how these numbers are all connected whole part whole and so on. So if we have 14 and 7 as one part:14 \- 7 \= 7Which means:7 \+ 7 \= 14

A bunch of cards just like that. Those are definitely class favorites and because of how many different skills there are and how many different you know task card bunches there are we do that for definitely a few weeks and then I continue that with students that really need it throughout the year. Um they really like the task cards because they're tactile, they're hands-on, they usually get to work with a partner um and they're kind of fun for them.  
So those are ones I love. I will of course link them down below and let me head back to the classroom. So I hope you found this video helpful and found some of these games fun. Um any questions about them of course let me know down below. I will link anything I can obviously. But as always if you did enjoy this video please give it a thumbs up so I know, make sure you are subscribed to my channel and click that bell that way you're notified of every new video. See you in the next one, bye\!  
